# Medical Doctor in Taiwan and the US

In Taiwan, medical doctor is a 6-7 year combined undergraduate/graduate program, which is quite different from that of the US, where medical doctor is a 4 year graduate program independent of a undergraduate program. In the following sections, we will see the comparison of two systems, their similarities and differences.

In the first two years, Taiwanese medical students take fundamental undergraduate courses, like calculus, chemistry, physics, etc, and also advanced (premedical) courses, like biochemistry, microbiology, immunology, etc, to pave the way for core medical courses in the upcoming 3rd/4th year, including anatomy, histology, physiology, pathology, pharmacology. As an analogy, Taiwanese medical students spend the first two years to finish fundamental courses tantamount to a US undergraduate program, and another two years to finish core medical courses tantamount to the first two years of a US medical program.

After 4 years of medical school, most Taiwanese medical students would take National Board Exam Step 1, which is one of the requirements for graduation. Just like USMLE Step 1 for US medical students, Taiwanese board exam focuses on medical science from biochemistry to pharmacology, and is computer-based. However, two board exams are different in that USMLE Step 1 spans a whole day (8 hours) and puts more emphasis on the connection between medical science and clinical vignettes.

After the board exam, Taiwanese medical students proceed to their 5th/6th year for clinical clerkship tantamount to what 3rd/4th year US medical students do. Finally, the last year of the medical program culminates in clinical internship, in which medical students are involved in actual clinical works and shifts. Full responsibility is expected for a 7th-year Taiwanese medical student, pretty much the same as internship (PGY-1) in the US. However, an internship program is a guaranteed and required training process for every Taiwanese medical student.

After graduation, Taiwanese graduates are subject to another year of general medicine practicing and required to take National Board Exam Step 2 as well as Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE), which is tantamount to USMLE Step 2 CK and CS, respectively.

Just a reminder, I am never intended to say which system is superior or better. From the standpoint of a Taiwanese medical student, once you get entry into a medical program, there will not be overwhelming obstacles anymore. In addition, the results of the board exam are not counted into the application process for residency program. And provided positions always outnumber medical graduates. We are kind of like a privileged class provided with a definite decent job at the moment of enrollment into medical school. Always be grateful and stay hungry!
