# Programming Languages

There are quite a few programming languages, either proprietary or open-source, for programmers to choose from. What programming language is most suitable for a beginner is always a pastime dispute among computer engineers. The reason we have that many choices out there is that each language has its irreplaceable niche in the market. From **low-** to **high-** level, from **static-** to **dynamic-** typing, from **declarative** to **imperative** languages, combination of different features along the scale contributes to the diversity of programming languages. Another crucial characteristics about a programming language is its capacity in handling errors/exceptions during the execution of a program, which can vary substantially in different languages. Also, the history of a programming language plays an important role in determining its own niche. In short, a language is regarded as more friendly to certain disciplines of computer programming, for example, systems programming, networks programming, database management, etc.

Programming languages generally support arithmetic operations, conditional expressions, loops, functions, etc. Other advanced designs to simplify the codes and reduce the burden on programmers include class, lambda expressions, complex native data structures, etc. One misconception I would like to point out is that one programming language is more powerful than another. The fact is that every language has the ability to complete a job that another can do. Technically speaking, all eligible programming languages are **Turing-complete**. The programs written in different languages all run on "Turing Machine", which is the common paradigm of modern computers.

During my years as a computer science undergraduate student, I had a chance to have a glance at different facets of programming. Some languages that I have been accustomed to in my day-to-day works are briefed as below. Depending on the purpose, a programming language is chosen accordingly. For instance, C and Python may be languages of choice for applications that interact with computer hardware and networks; on the other hand, R and Matlab are rich in packages for statistics and digital signal processing. However, Java is always my first resort for general purpose programming due to its comprehensive library and its verbose but rigorous syntax requirement.

## Java

Java is one of the few languages brought into being in the early history of computer programming. It is characterized by well-structured syntax but solicits inevitable criticism on its verbosity. Equipped with profuse built-in libraries, Java supports native graphical user interface, network programming, database management, etc. It is also powered by a broad community, of which the most well-known one is [Apache](https://www.apache.org). Due to its enduring popularity in the industry, Java will undoubtedly keep evolving at a steady pace to adapt to the ever-changing world.

## C & Python

C has a long history, compared to other newcomers, which can date back to 1970s. It is extremely efficient due not only to less overloading for each instruction but also to direct compilation from human-readable code to Assembly code. C does not provide advanced data structures, which makes it a popular tool for classroom use, since students have to implement each data structure/algorithm from scratches instead of using a black-box without knowing what is inside.

Python is thought of as the only language that can possibly replace the dominance of Java and C in foreseeable future. Python encapsulates both low- and high-level functionalities into its coding library, and has been largely adapted for both general-purpose programming and data analysis. Its intuitive syntax is an attraction for beginners. In addition, its large user-base and solid open-source supports have drawn attention from technology giants to development of Python-compatible APIs.

## R & Matlab

Speaking of statistics, R is arguably the first choice coming to mind. Designed to mitigate the overwhelming pipeline during data analysis, R puts together common functionalities a statistician would need and wraps them into standalone functions. R is regarded as one of the easiest-to-learn languages compared to others that entail steep learning curve.

Matlab is one of the few proprietary languages in industrial use. Due to its market strategy, Matlab also cooperates with academics to allow scholars/students to use its product in negligible cost. It boasts of highly-efficient vector/matrix arithmetics outstripping any other choices in the market. As a result of its exceptional performance in linear algebra, an appreciable number of digital signal/image processing packages rely on Matlab.
