# USCE Clinical Electives

Having come to the States for over a month, time to write something to keep record of things I observe here and experiences I have to share, especially those relevant to the medical system and working environment in hospital. Hopefully, the stuff would benefit foreign medical students pursuing their career in the States.

__United States clinical experience (USCE)__ is an essential piece of your medical career in the US. The goal of the USCE is undoubtedly to earn yourself a letter of recommendation from physicians you work with. Earning a letter can be the easiest and, at the same time, the most difficult part for a foreign medical student. It is easy in that once you get an opportunity to participate in any USCE, just try the best you can to finish any assignments from your advisors. Hard work does not require intelligence or talent but always pays off. The difficult part would undoubtedly be where to look for USCE that would meet your needs. Three most-widely recognized types of USCE are (1) __clinical elective__ (sub-internship and clerkship), (2) __clinical observership__, and (3) __research__. Here, I am going to focus the attention on the first of the three, clinical elective.

Clinical elective is exclusively for enrolled medical students and regarded as the strongest type of USCE. If you are still enrolled in a medical school, never miss a chance to achieve such USCE. The most precious part of clinical elective is hands-on clinical works. In contrast, observership is more like shadowing without hands-on opportunities and regarded as a less valuable alternative. You can apply for clinical electives either through your medical school or not.

Ask the staffs of your medical school in charge about any affiliation and go to the interview to earn the opportunity. It also exempts you from tuition fee (in the most case). Take my medical school, National Taiwan University SOM, for example. My medical school has an affiliation with Temple University SOM, therefore, I did my clerkship rotation at Temple for a month without a penny for tuition. However, University of Pittsburgh SOM, another affiliation of my medical achool, still charges me 2100 USD for two months of rotation. Generally speaking, communication in between is usually efficient and tedious paper work for application can be saved a little bit. Also, the requirements for application would be less vigorous.

Otherwise, you will have to look for relevant information from the website of every medical school. Information to keep in mind includes whether there is availability for foreign medical students, when the program is open for application, the location of the medical school, the required documents and tuition fee, etc. No doubt, tedious work is necessitated. If you have an awesome resume, it is very likely you earn USCE from a better medical school than any affiliation of your home medical school. Tuition fee is usually amazingly high, but the USCE always worth the fee if you need it desperately, doesn't it?

Anyway, earning USCEs and letters of recommendation is a long tedious way for us foreign medical student. But give it a try or do not waste time looking into it at all.
